# `bm-haskell` Design Log

Author
: Travis Cardwell

Date
: 2021-07-02

## Motivation

I started this project after a Firefox upgrade introduced significant
usability issues to the way that I used the browser.  I had been using Firefox
Home for performing search queries as well as opening links to frequently used
sites.  The upgrade forced users to search in the address bar instead of a
text field.  I use the address bar for typing URLs, with completion using
bookmarked URLs.  I do *not* use it for performing search queries because the
completion often leads to mistakes.

I was not satisfied with Firefox Home for other reasons as well, so I decided
to go ahead and implement a new version of a browser home page that I used
many years ago.  The page displays whenever you open a new tab, and you can
use the keyboard to quickly open links or perform search queries.
Unfortunately, Firefox no longer supports custom "new tab pages" and
extensions that provide the necessary functionality have many usability issues
due to limitations imposed by Firefox for security purposes, so I aborted the
project.

I designed and wrote `bm` to increase my browser productivity.  I can use it
in my terminal, from within [Vim][] (`:!bm ...`), or with [dmenu][].  For
example, I can type `Win+P` and then type `bm / LinearTypes` followed by the
enter key to open a search query for the `LinearTypes` extension.  I do not
need to worry about completion causing a mistake...  I do not even need to be
looking at the screen, allowing me to keep my focus on my task.

[Vim]: <https://www.vim.org/>
[dmenu]: <https://tools.suckless.org/dmenu/

## Design Notes

The implementation of `bm` is quite small, but there are many details (edge
cases) that complicate the code.  My implementation priorities were as
follows:

1. Usability: the user interface should be easy to use.
2. Performance: the program should open bookmarks and queries without a
   noticeable delay.  Perhaps a delay of less than a half second is
   acceptable.  On my not-very-powerful laptop using my real configuration,
   bookmarks and queries load in 0.1 to 0.2 seconds.
3. Code elegance: the code should be easy to understand in order to make it
   easy to maintain.

### Strings

I wrote the initial version using the `String` data type because that is the
type that the libraries use.  Once the program was working, I modified it to
use the `Text` data type to see if it would improve the performance.  There
was no different in performance, so I kept the `String` version.

### Vectors

The current implementation performs linear traversal of vectors to search for
bookmark keywords that match arguments.  Performance *might* improve by using
a different data structure (such as a trie), but I suspect that the cost of
building the data structure would outweigh the search performance gains.  In
particular, the vector length is generally small, and the data structure needs
to be built during *every* run.

### Completion

Command-line completion is context-sensitive, so the completion API provided
by the [optparse-applicative][] library is insufficient.  The functionality is
implemented by parsing the command-line arguments before passing them on to
`optparse-applicative`.  It takes advantage of program termination in order
the simplify the many conditionals.  The resulting code is not exemplary
functional programming, but the resulting behavior is "functional" in that it
handles the many details correctly.

[optparse-applicative]: <https://hackage.haskell.org/package/optparse-applicative>
